Jason Oakes
Created 6/8/17
Last Edited 10/1/18

###Topics on the development of the pre-proposal for ‘the study of problems of coordination in wired workplaces’

#### The _Resituating Scientific Knowledge_ project lives on!

Gerson has been thinking about the RSK problem recently, especially since his recent hospitalization(s). He’s doing comparative analysis of the two experiences. He noted at Kaiser Permanente’s Redwood City there are like 5 specialized departments that all deal exclusively with neuro issues. There’a s neuro ICU, there are “neuro-intensivists” which is a doctor’s specialization designation, there is a near step-down. The intensivist has about 7 years of training on top of her MD. She’s really smart, but she’s a surgeon cowboy. She prescribed stool softeners as a way of reducing straining at the stool to prevent pressure building up on the brain. The surgery was done under “conscious sedation” and local anesthetic. The surgeon operated solo or with only minimal assistance. 

SO all that’s great, but the level of patient care service in the peripheral services in the step-down unit. Not just mistakes in menu by the cafeteria. More along the lines of the PM nurse not delivering meds on time. More along the lines of the inhalation therapy guy not wanting to give any other medication. More along the lines of the nurse on duty turning off the nurse station alarm twice in a row and admonishing the patient not press the alarm button again. The patient was able to talk to the nurse manager, but observed that although the nurse manager was able to recite the script of “we’re here to help and patient experience is very important and central to our work here at KP Neuro” but it was evident that this kind of care coordination issue was pervasive. 

Additionally, the floor is semi-open plan floor, in that the walls of the rooms for patents are glass and although there are curtain screens for when privacy is important the main idea is for patients to be visible by the staff at all times.

One explanation for this level of discombobulation is this: you have this incredibly fine grained division of labor. You have a lot of cross cutting occupational concerns that are largely meshed together smoothly but there are still important points of pressure. The facility had been re-organized somewhat recently by “the engineers” who are probably McKinsey-style consultants who “changed everything around” but didn’t talk to “a single” doctor or nurse about how the place was put together before and why that might have been. //The outcome of the re-org was that there was a lot of control over the fine details of the work flow but there is very little sensitivity to error and special or exceptional circumstances.

There are different “policy heuristics” that different occupational specialties use to inform and direct their work priorities— look both ways before you cross the street type stuff; wash your hands before you go back to work. For a doctor the policy heuristic is “first do no harm”. For a lawyer is to serve the client (“zealously”). BUT the in practice heuristic for doctors is “if in doubt cut it out” and for lawyers it is “get the client’s money up front”. 

The thing is that the different policy heuristics of the different occupational categories interfere with each other, and this causes untold frustration between the different occupational categories on the floor, and untold discomfort and danger to the client/patient. These policy heuristics may or may not also interfere with the social control policies and devices such as the hospital beds which can sense the weight of the patient and can also be used to detect whether or not the patient is in bed (thus being a dual purpose device coopted for social control purposes, i.e. keeping a  patient who is a fall risk in their bed). 

This also plays into change-of-shift “handoff” — this is how the work flow keeps continuity between member of the //same// occupational category over time if that time spans crosses shift changes.

There is also the increasing monitoring and vigilance of patient’s goings-on, in terms of for example being a fall risk. It’s serious legal and regulatory issue for patients to be exposed to fall risks. The solution to the problem of fall risks was to build policy heuristics or make additions to existing policy heuristics to monitor whether patients are in bed or not if they are classified as fall risks. Non skid socks, weight sensing beds, wrist bands in a visible color indication fall risk. 

The then-modified policy heuristic conflicts with the prior policy heuristic in ways that cause confusion between occupational categories and pain and inconvenience for the patient. One of the parts of the nurse’s policy heuristic is to make the patient feel good or at least not bad. This conflicts with having to keep them in bed and having to follow them into the toilet, and it conflicts with the patient’s desire to go to the bathroom when the want to without obtaining special permission.

So, the fuck up comes, not because the doctors are throwing knives around or drinking on the job. The fuckups come from when everyone is doing their jobs “correctly” that is according to their proper policy heuristics— which then come into conflict with each other.

Finally note that the stress and strain of these heuristics “rolls downhill” onto the lower ranked members of a given category and onto the lower ranked categories. 

Rationalization of care-provision workflows reduce the room for slippage and free-wiggle room for interpretation of local situations. And the reduction of wiggle room impacts negatively on privacy and dignity and autonomy of the patent to the point of causing psychological distress. The old way of doing things gave the nurse on duty significant leeway to make special local arrangements and work arounds with the patient in order to minimize this distress. By taking away the nurse’s wiggle room the rationalization of service provision leads to putting the practitioner in a Catch 22 where the general mission of patient care and patient distress come second to the specific aspects of the policy heuristic where the real important things are fall risks and the adherence to the prescribed medication and treatment schedule and the observation of the patient for the patents’ “own good.”

And: The practical upshot of these conflicts at the level of policy heuristics is that the low-level service provision staff feel beaten down and that nothing they do is right and so they get low moral and make mistakes and act like they don’t care because eventually they really don’t. 

See Also: normal emergencies in power plants and submarines and mode confusion in airlines. 

####Gerson’s solution to this problem is to return a degree of leeway and authority for the distal-level care providers to make calls based on what the needs of the situation are.

####Griesemer thought about all of this and decided it had something to do with RSK issues! And he said he would get back to us on it.

Gerson said: 
>we need to think about how the machinery of institutions and repertoires works in here within the idea of policy heuristic. But it needs to be in plain language because we are already straining the conceptual bounds and putting a lot into it. 
    
    
